Ethics tutorial:
REB: research ethics board
impact of research DESIGNS! on stuff
stanford prison stuff - good intent - bad results -> 
ended 	

It was a newspaper ad - call to ad!
money was involved - they reacted normally -

no diiff between guards and prison in beginning

mild shock in arrest and prison welcoming!
for humiliation purposes they went too far too create real situations!
no good sleep!

so at first they were new to their role ... but they kept on getting more familiar - both guards and prisoners

They asserted force to crush the rebellion! 

because of budget -> set up privilege cells
How do you think you would have behaved if you were a prisoner in this situation? Would you have rejected these privileges in order to maintain prisoner solidarity?


it's a well known and used tactic to break the prisoners like this

Most prisoners believed that the subjects selected to be guards were chosen because they were bigger than those who were made prisoners, but actually, there was no difference in the average height of the two groups. What do you think caused this misperception?

a person showed terrible signs of emotional and mental discomfort, they didn't release him at frist because they thought he was cunning them!!!

the consultant fucked up by sending this unwanted message that they can't quit and they're real prisoners!

rumour of a prison escape - > what they should have done: recorded it and confronted it with social and psychilogical research view -> what they actually did ->  reacted with concern over the security of our prison!! ->  they planned how to foil the escape and asked police to transform the prisoners the old police jail (whyyy???) -> put them in chains and bags and transform somewhere else !

We even thought of luring #8612 back on some pretext and then imprisoning him again because he was released on false pretenses.!!!! (holy fuck!)

"Say, what's the independent variable in this study?"

He was thinking like a warden rather than a psychologist!!! 

What were the "data" in this experiment!?  what should have been done to minimize the effects of experimenter bias on the outcome of the study? What were the dangers of the principal investigator assuming the role of prison superintendent?

prisoners had accepted that they are prisoners! they were convinced by the priest that they need a lawyer

people were breaking apart! and both sides were deep into their roles, blurring between the reality and test!

Why did they obey after the parole hearing? why didn't they quit the test?
 Because they felt powerless to resist.

three types of guards- normal- good guy and abusive (in spite of the original personality tests)

how is abu-ghrieb prison similar to the abusive thing went on stanford prison

prisoners where isolated and not united - like war prisoners and mental health hospital people

At this point it became clear that we had to end the study. We had created an overwhelmingly powerful situation -- a situation in which prisoners were withdrawing and behaving in pathological ways, and in which some of the guards were behaving sadistically. Even the "good" guards felt helpless to intervene, and none of the guards quit while the study was in progress. Indeed, it should be noted that no guard ever came late for his shift, called in sick, left early, or demanded extra pay for overtime work.


In the encounter sessions, all the prisoners were happy the experiment was over, but most of the guards were upset that the study was terminated prematurely. Why do you think the guards reacted this way?

Questions -> Health sciences -> you're a prisoner - get into an experiment for extra previleges - get side effects - know it's because of the drugs in the food = know it might prevent skin cancer (by researchers' overhearing) but has side effects - 


-------------------------------------------- 
RESULTS: 
1- it's important to keep consider the circumstances of the people who will become participants

Questions to be asked: 
1- is there a power relationship?
2- cultural norms that need to be factored in recriutment and desing?
3- economic circumstances of the participants
4- privacy can be protected how? 
5- any social repercussions?

---------------------------------------------
why ethics? because of many unwanted research harms to people
1- foundation: respect human dignity -> Through 3 principles: 
{1- respect for persons 2- concern for welfare 3-Justice}

1- Respect for humans: unaccptable to treat them bad as means to and end (even research goal)

For two kind of people: 1- direct participaants 2-ones whose data is being used - counteract to this: Texas vampyr! they treated the people quite bad in taking the blood and testing the subjects

How to apply: respect each person's autonomy - their ability to decide to refuse or give their consent to somethig in the experiment - 
1- Must inform them clearly of the impacts of the experiment
2- Must respect their decision and autonomy afterwards


How consent is sought:
1- consider auonomy is research design: *The decision to participate in research should be voluntary (free of undue influence or coercion), informed, and ongoing*

2- factors that can deminish it: 1- lack or misinformation 2- fear of authority (researchers with auth) 3- worry over effect of previliges and quiality of life 4-community pressure
3- how to respect dignity of those without autonomy:  Child-seniors-disable people -> ask a guardian or third party for consent -> involve them (the subjects) as much as possible in the decision making process 

-------------------------------------------------------
Concern for Welfare: 
Making sure that research doesn't affect participants QoF and pose unnecesarry risks for them!

1- physical, mental and spiritual health:
2- economical and social
3- privacy and personal information protection
4- biological materials in consent with the donor
5- possible effects on friends, family and etc

Stolen laptop example here

How to apply- 
Each person decides for itself -> researchers must provide detailed info of the risks and potential damages + in a suitable form (verbal, written, any other form)

1- consider (all risks to subject and relatives)
2- consult with groups that may be affected (for instance by discrimination) : 
for instance could the research affect a minority in a bad way?
3- eliminate or minimize the risks
4- maximize benefits
5- provide accurate and accesible info

--------------------------------
Justice
Means treat everyone FAIR and EQUITABLY = 

Fair: DOESN'T MEAN treating everyone the same - but meaning giving respect and concern for welfare to everyone as the same amount (3rd floor meeting example)

Equitable: Everyone shares the same benefits and burdens - no one just takes benefits (like prison guards)  and no one just burdens (like the prisoners)

How to apply: 
1- Consider WHO and from what group are the participants: 
any inclusion or exclusion of people -> should be => justified by the research question

2- is there under-represenation because of vulnerable circumstances? 
some vul. may be temporarily - or some vul. maybe even the question of the research, exclusion or inclusion because of these cannot happen!

3- Just treatment of vul. people
Make sure they're not marginalized or exploited

4- Imbalance of power between researchers and participants must be removed! (like the prison case it can cause harm and unjust behaviour)

-------------------------------------------------------------------
Module 2 - Defining Research

What falls under TCPS2 and what may be exempt from REBs

Defining research: 
an undertaking intended to extend knowledge through a diciplined inquiry or systematic inverstigation

so 1- Quality assurance 2- creative review and work don't fall under this defenition

Quality assurance is review WHEN: 1- not organization mandatory 2- not condition of empolyment or training 3- the results are(or will be) used for research purposes

Creative practices -> WHEN need REB that will have human groups to participate in focus groups and stuff! (somehow actively affect lives)

Research involving human: 1- Have direct participants 2-Have human biological material

What research doesn't need REB review: 
1- research involving data in the public domain (like the cencus opinion of a soceity) : 
	1- Legally accessible info
	2- public and free of privacy expectations (means no one must 	expect that this data doesn't breach a certain ring of people 	around them) - For instance chat data is publically available but can have expectations so needs REB review
2- Observation in public places: 
	1- not staged
	2- no direct intraction with those involved
	3- the observed have no reasonble expectation of privacy
	4- no indiviual identificiation in the results ( and can't be identified in the data or results of the research by other people)
3- secondary use of anonymos data or bio materials:
	study or samples have been taken for other purposes
	1- data and results can't be linked or used to identify the owner of the remains and samples

When you don't know: Always contact REB for knowing

------------------------------------
Module 3: Assessing risk and benefits

it's an importsnt issue to asses risks and benefits and not overlook benefits and underlook the risks

1- The proportionate approach: REBs process of assessing forseable risks and benfits:
The goal is:
	1-  unnecessary participant risk prevention
	2- benefits outweigh the risks
	3- help research to be in accorande of TCPS

Levels of risk:
The dominant core principle here: the principle of concern for Welfare
Aspects of a risk:
	1- probability and magnitude of it:
how probable is harm
is good info for harm assesment available
if not - what can we do to identify it's probability
how severe is the harm
would it extend to others?
would it last long?
	2- Minimal Risk:
if the risk is the same as their everyday life risk
(to see it - compare study questions with the questions they might face in daily life)
FOR highrisks lives: 
1- not to expose them to unnecessary risk
2- using them won't increase their vulnerability
	3- Above minimal risk
more than everyday life - needs more provision - ENSURE ANY UNAVOIABLE RISK IS JUSTIFIED BY THE BENEFITS OF THE RESEARCH -

Types of Risk: 
1- Physical: minimalize them + offer follow-up care in case it happens
2- Psychological: depression, PTSD, anger and ..., Same care as above
3- Economic: Job security in an org., Asees, minimalize and talk in consent
4- Social: discrimination, ostracization and ..., Same care as above

Types of benefits: 
most research have no short-term good benefits for the participants other than extending the knowledge of the collective society
1- direct: like immediate health benfits or psych benefits 
2- indirect: e.g helping the community or a group rather than the person itself
3- Advancement of knowledge: affect the future society as a whole

*Incentives, such as money for convincing people to take part in a research is NOT considered as benefits*

Risk to researchers:
Danger in society of harmful situations
Fear of their professors and etc.
REB is more for participants BUT it can refer and sugget ways to protect the researchers themselves

---------------
Module 4: Consent
The dominant pronciple here: Respect for persons
Consent must be
	1- Free: voluntarily and without pressure 
	2- Informed: Puropose, Risks and Benefits must be said to participant, Sufficient time to consider and ask questions
	3- Ongoing:  Any new info in the research must be told to participant, and consent must be asked again
We're at consent process

The consent process: 
shouldn't be rushed ...
the process is: 
	1- recruitment: 
The poster and other materials must provide clear information and not be misleading. 
	2- information: 
information presented in complete and in a lay language:
purpose of study, what they must do, risk and benefits, alternatives to participation, contact info of REB and the researcher(s), assurance of respect to their choice
	3- documenting consent:
write, record or implicitly get consent. it must include: clear info, contact of REB and researcher, say they can leave without penalty, not waiving legal rights and etc
	4- debriefing (when required): 
when deception is used (justified by question and e=benefits) it must be told to the participant that it may be or may not be used: mustn't conceal vital and risk or benefit info, another non-deceptive method exists, not explained or justifed, not mitigated well

debriefing happens at the END of the study! and should include: 
1- clear research question 2-disclosure of deceptions 3-explanation of how data is used 4-contact info 5-seek clarification for the user

Keeping consent free:
These elements can be comromised:
1- Incentives: like big money or things that cloud their judgement, they pressure poor people more than the normal and rich ones (It's called undue inducement)
2- Authority/power relationship: in authoritarian orgs. people might be pressured by auth or think it can bring them perks. Researchers must tell them about risks and benefits of the organization they're in, clearly.
3- Undue influence: doc/patient - student prof ... can cause problem in the consent process + maniplulation from friends or family can happen too

Keeping consent informed:
include: 1- details  2- invite specifically 3- research question, who's researcher and why and for where they're doing it 4-benefits and risks 5-assurance of rights to take back consent 5-disclosure of potential conflict of interests

Capacity to consent:
in research it's defined as: 
capacity of participant to: 1- understand what those risks and benefits mean for their well-being and welfare 2-understand the effects of research 3-evalute what's best for them 4-seek auth of third-party in case of disabled (child, seniors and mentaly and physically disabled)

Assent and Dissent:
event when third party agrees + involve the ind. ALWAYS THE PARTICIPANTS DECISION COMES FIRST EVEN IF THEY'RE CAPABLE!!!
Research directives: one writes it when they have the capacity so that when they lost it, people know what to do. They don't have legal status but their use if for Respect for Humans pronciple.

Alternations to consent:
Scenarios which the consent need can be waived or loosened:
1- Observing children in daycare: Naturalistic observation - children consent may not be needed - but parents and kindergaten must give consent
2- online survey about voting intentions: must state all the needed knowledge before starting the process 
3- analyzing trial transcripts to assess truthfulness of a witness: considered public record unless said otherwise (so don't generally need consent unless told otherwise)

Acceptabel alterations of consent:
if these conditions apply: 
1- only minimal risk
2- waiver has no negative impact on participants
3- give them info and let them choose to withdraw any time
4- doesn't invlove a theraputic or clinical intervention

examples: 1- observational research: people must be observed unnoticed
but even then it must be proved to REBs that: 1- it's the only way 2-minimal risks for those involved 3-no expectation of privacy 4-no risk of identification in the results 
2- Critical inquiry: study that critiques an org doesn't need consent from the org.: When public interest and an org (and its employees' interests) get in conflict with each other ... REBs must weigh benefits and risks and alsways choose public ground if possible. They must include: 1- org view on the research 2-potential risk 3-provacy safeguarded to the full extent

Alternative consent procedures:
1- parental consent waiver: when child's privacy from parents might be in danger - 	the girld case (might be in conflict with justice)
2- deception: must be fully justified by the question and tasks must be briefed in the most clear way possible and they must know the deception in the earliest stage possible - Even option of removing data after participation is possible (and good)

Medical emergencies: experimental treatment is possible if: 
1- REB has approved emergency no consent procedure
2- doesn't conflict with any law or legal thing

Privacy:

Privacy
The state of being free from intrusion or interference by others

Confidentiality: The thing that your infor can't be backtracked to you and abused or in any ways used agaisnt you ... preventing that is confidentiality

Expectations of privacy:

they expect any info of them (that can be used to ID them)
 in research results:
1- won't link to their other things without consent
2- not be available to anyone other than research staff
3- stored securely later destroyed

Degress of IDability: 
1- Direct ID info
2- indirect ID info
3- anonymized info: code without re-linkage ability
4- coded info
5- anonymous info




Last one: 
The goal of an REB is to represent the interests of participants by assessing the foreseeable risks, ethical implications, and potential benefits of each proposal they review. Researchers can consult with REB staff at the design phase of their project, while they are preparing their application for REB review, and during the review process.

The purpose of the REB is to preserve respect for the core principles of this Policy: Respect for Persons, Concern for Welfare, and Justice under any circumstances.